Discount Rate Strategy
Given the nature of the asset, this integration allows for innovative features that provide greater utility for Governance and community participants. The implementation of GHO includes a Discount Strategy mechanism. The initial discount strategy allows Safety Module participants (users who have staked AAVE and now hold stkAAVE) to access a discount on the GHO borrow rate. The strategy sets a certain amount of GHO at a discount per stkAAVE , and a discount on the interest rates that can vary from 0% (no discount) to 100% (full discount). Only stkAAVE is eligible for the GHO borrowing discount.

The configuration of the discount rate is controlled by Aave Governance. Aave Governance has the right to determine the discount model parameters and eventually propose changes to the current implementation.

By contributing to the Safety Module, users are taking a risk that they in the case of bad debt arising in the Aave protocol. To incentivize users to participate in staking, and reward them for taking this risk, users staking AAVE can receive a discount on their interest rate.

Discount Rate Updates
The discount model is designed to be updated easily, therefore if Governance determines a different strategy is required, it can be implemented efficiently. Governance may decide to change the strategy in situations when too many users have a very good discount rate.

The discount rate is available to the user for a certain period of time and is subject to change whenever a user triggers a discount update or is rebalanced.

When a user receives a discount, it is assigned to them for a certain period, for example, 6 months. After the aforementioned, if Aave Governance has set a new discount strategy, and the user receives another discount rate, it may not be the same, it will have changed to the rate updated by Governance.

This may also happen if a user triggers a discount update, such as, borrowing and repaying GHO, and updating their stkAAVE balance.

Initial Implementation
The initial implementation of the discount model on borrow rates defines:

A maximum amount of GHO that can be generated at a discounted rate through borrowing within the Aave Protocol, per stkAAVE held.
A discount on the borrow rate that the user will receive per discounted GHO.